jt(1) -- transform JSON data to tabular format
==============================================

## SYNOPSIS

`jt` `[-hV]`<br>
`jt` `-u` <string><br>
`jt` [`-acj`] [`COMMAND` ...]

## DESCRIPTION

**Jt** reads UTF-8 encoded JSON forms from <stdin> and writes tab separated
values (or CSV) to <stdout>. A simple stack-based programming language is used
to extract values from the JSON input for printing.

## OPTIONS

  * `-h`:
    Print usage info and exit.

  * `-V`:
    Print version and license info and exit.

  * `-a`:
    Explicit iteration mode: require the `.` command to iterate over arrays
    instead of iterating automatically.

  * `-c`:
    CSV output mode: write RFC 4180 compliant CSV records.

  * `-j`:
    Inner join mode: discard rows with missing columns.

  * `-s`:
    A no-op, included for compatibility with earlier versions.

  * `-u` <string>:
    Unescape JSON <string>, print it, and exit. Double-quotes around <string>
    are optional.

## OPERATION

Non-option arguments are words (commands) in a stack-based programming language.
Commands operate on the stacks provided by the **jt** runtime:

  * The `DATA` stack contains JSON values commands will operate on.

  * The `GOSUB` stack contains pointers into the data stack.

  * The `INDEX` stack contains pointers to iterators during iteration.

  * The `LOOP` stack contains pointers to iterators between iterations.

  * The `OUTPUT` stack contains values to print after each iteration.

When **jt** starts, the following happens:

1. One JSON form is read from <stdin>, parsed, and pushed onto the data stack.

2. If the top of the data stack is a JSON array the next item in the array is
   pushed onto the data stack based on state previously saved on the loop stack.
   The loop stack is then popped and pushed onto the index stack.

3. The next command is executed.

4. Steps 2 and 3 are repeated until no commands are left to execute.

5. Values in the output stack are printed, separated by tabs and followed by a
   newline (see **OUTPUT FORMAT** below). Data, output, and gosub stacks are
   reset to their states as they were after step 1.

6. Loop variables are popped off of the index stack. They are then incremented
   and pushed onto the loop stack as necessary.

7. Steps 2 through 6 are repeated until the loop stack is empty (i.e. there are
   no more iterations left).

This process is repeated until there is no more JSON to read.

## COMMANDS

**Jt** provides the following commands:

  * `[`:
    Save the state of the data stack: the current data stack pointer is pushed
    onto the gosub stack.

  * `]`:
    Restore the data stack to a saved state: pop the gosub stack and restore
    the data stack pointer to that state.

  * `%`:
    Push the value at the top of the data stack onto the output stack.

  * `%=`<NAME>:
    Like `%`, but also sets the heading for this column to <NAME>. Headers
    will be printed as the first line of output when this command has been used.

  * `^`:
    Push the value at the top of the index stack onto the output stack. Note
    that the index stack will always have at least one item: the index of the
    last JSON object read from stdin.

  * `^=`<NAME>:
    Like `^`, but also sets the heading for this column to <NAME>. Headers
    will be printed as the first line of output when this command has been used.

  * `@`:
    Print the keys of the object at the top of the data stack and exit.

    If the value at the top of the data stack is an array the first item in the
    array is pushed onto the data stack and the command is reevaluated.

    If the value at the top of the data stack is not an object or an array then
    its type is printed in brackets, eg. <[array]>, <[string]>, <[number]>,
    <[boolean]>, or <[null]>. If there is no value then <[none]> is printed.

  * `+`:
    Parse embedded JSON: if the item at the top of the data stack is a string,
    parse it and push the result onto the data stack.

    If the item at the top of the data stack is not a string or if there is an
    error parsing the JSON then nothing is done (the operation is a no-op).

  * `.`:
    Iterate over the values of the object at the top of the data stack. The
    current value will be pushed onto the data stack and the current key will
    be pushed onto the index stack.

  * `[`<KEY>`]`:
    Drill down: get the value of the <KEY> property of the object at the top
    of the data stack and push that value onto the data stack.

    If the item at the top of the data stack is not an object or if the object
    has no <KEY> property a blank field is printed, unless the `-j` option was
    specified in which case the entire row is removed from the output.

    If the <KEY> property of the object is an array subsequent commands will
    operate on one of the items in the array, chosen automatically by `jt`.
    The array index will be available to subsequent commands via the index
    stack.

  * <KEY>:
    See `[`<KEY>`]` above &mdash; the `[` and `]` may be omitted if the
    property name <KEY> does not conflict with any `jt` command.

## OUTPUT FORMAT

The format of printed output from **jt** (see `%` in **COMMANDS**, above)
depends on the type of thing being printed:

### Primitives

JSON primitives (i.e. `null`, `true`, and `false`) and numbers are printed
verbatim. **Jt** does not process them in any way. Numbers can be of arbitrary
precision, as long as they conform to the JSON parsing grammar.

If special formatting is required the `printf` program is your friend:

    $ printf %.0f 2.99792458e9
    2997924580

### Strings

Strings are printed verbatim, minus the enclosing double quotes. No unescaping
is performed because tabs or newlines in JSON strings would break the tabular
output format.

If unescaped values are desired either use the `-c` flag to enable CSV output
(see **CSV** below) or use the `-u` option and pass the string as an argument:

    $ jt -u 'i love music \u266A'
    i love music ♪

### Collections

Objects and arrays are printed as JSON with whitespace removed. Note that it
is only possible to print arrays when the `-a` option is specified (see the
**Iteration (Arrays)** and **Explicit Iteration** sections below).

### CSV

The `-c` flag enables CSV output conforming to RFC 4180. This format supports
strings containing tabs, newlines, etc.:

    $ jt -c [ foo % ] [ bar % ] baz % <<EOT
    - {
    -   "foo": "one\ttwo",
    -   "bar": "three\nfour",
    -   "baz": "music \"\u266A\""
    - }
    - EOT
    "one    two","three
    four","music ""♪"""

## EXIT STATUS

**Jt** will exit with a status of 1 if an error occurred, or 0 otherwise.

## EXAMPLES

Below are a number of examples demonstrating how to use **jt** commands to do
some simple exploration and extraction of data from JSON and JSON streams.

### Explore

The `@` command prints information about the item at the top of the data stack.
When the item is an object `@` prints its keys:

```bash
$ jt @ <<EOT
- {
-   "foo": 100,
-   "bar": 200,
-   "baz": 300
- }
- EOT
foo
bar
baz
```

When the top item is an array `@` prints information about the first item in
the array:

```bash
$ jt @ <<EOT
- [
-   {"foo": 100, "bar": 200},
-   {"baz": 300, "baf": 400}
- ]
- EOT
foo
bar
```

Otherwise, `@` prints the type of the item, or <[none]> if there is no value:

```bash
$ echo '"hello world"' | jt @
[string]

$ echo {} | jt foo @
[none]
```

### Drill Down

Property names are also commands. Use `foo` here as a command to drill down
into the <foo> property and then use `@` to print its keys:

```bash
$ jt foo @ <<EOT
- {
-   "foo": {
-     "bar": 100,
-     "baz": 200
-   }
- }
- EOT
bar
baz
```

A property name that conflicts with a **jt** command may be wrapped with square
brackets to drill down:

```bash
$ jt [@] @ <<EOT
- {
-   "@": {
-     "bar": 100,
-     "baz": 200
-   }
- }
- EOT
bar
baz
```

**Note:** The property name must be a JSON escaped string, so if the property
name in the JSON input contains eg. tab characters they must be escaped in the
command, like this:

```bash
$ jt 'foo\tbar' @ <<EOT
- {
-   "foo\tbar": {
-     "bar": 100,
-     "baz": 200
-   }
- }
- EOT
bar
baz
```

### Extract

The `%` command prints the item at the top of the data stack. Note that when
the top item is a collection it is printed as JSON (insiginificant whitespace
removed):

```bash
$ jt % <<EOT
- {
-   "foo": 100,
-   "bar": 200
- }
- EOT
{"foo":100,"bar":200}
```

Drill down and print:

```bash
$ jt foo bar % <<EOT
- {
-   "foo": {
-     "bar": 100
-   }
- }
- EOT
100
```

The `%` command can be used multiple times. The printed values will be delimited
by tabs:

```bash
$ jt % foo % bar % <<EOT
- {
-   "foo": {
-     "bar": 100
-   }
- }
- EOT
{"foo":{"bar":100}}     {"bar":100}     100
```

### Save / Restore

The `[` and `]` commands provide a sort of `GOSUB` facility. Use `[` to save
the data stack's state on the gosub stack. Then drill down and print a value.
The `]` command pops the gosub stack and restores the data stack to that state.
Now it is possible to drill down into a different path to print another value:

```bash
$ jt [ foo % ] bar % <<EOT
- {
-   "foo": 100,
-   "bar": 200
- }
- EOT
100     200
```

The `[` and `]` commands can be nested:

```bash
$ jt [ foo [ bar % ] [ baz % ] ] baf % <<EOT
- {
-   "foo": {
-     "bar": 100,
-     "baz": 200
-   },
-   "baf": "quux"
- }
- EOT
100     200     quux
```

### Iteration (Arrays)

**Jt** automatically iterates over arrays (unless this behavior is disabled
&mdash; see **Explicit Iteration** below), producing one tab-delimited record
per iteration, records separated by newlines:

```bash
$ jt [ foo % ] bar baz % <<EOT
- {
-   "foo": 100,
-   "bar": [
-     {"baz": 200},
-     {"baz": 300},
-     {"baz": 400}
-   ]
- }
- EOT
100     200
100     300
100     400
```

The `^` command includes the array index as a column in the result:

```bash
$ jt [ foo % ] bar ^ baz % <<EOT
- {
-   "foo": 100,
-   "bar": [
-     {"baz": 200},
-     {"baz": 300},
-     {"baz": 400}
-   ]
- }
- EOT
100     0       200
100     1       300
100     2       400
```

The `^` command is scoped to the innermost enclosing loop:

```bash
$ jt foo ^ bar ^ % <<EOT
- {
-   "foo": [
-     {"bar": [100, 200]},
-     {"bar": [300, 400]}
-   ]
- }
- EOT
0       0       100
0       1       200
1       0       300
1       1       400
```

### Iteration (Objects)

The `.` command iterates over the values of an object:

```bash
$ jt . % <<EOT
- {
-   "foo": 100,
-   "bar": 200,
-   "baz": 300
- }
- EOT
100
200
300
```

When iterating over an object the `^` command prints the name of the current
property:

```bash
$ jt . ^ % <<EOT
- {
-   "foo": 100,
-   "bar": 200,
-   "baz": 300
- }
- EOT
foo     100
bar     200
baz     300
```

### JSON Streams

**Jt** automatically iterates over entities in a JSON stream (optionally
delimited by whitespace):

```bash
$ jt [ foo % ] bar % <<EOT
- {"foo": 100, "bar": 200}
- {"foo": 200, "bar": 300}
- {"foo": 300, "bar": 400}
- EOT
100     200
200     300
300     400
```

The `^` command prints the current stream index:

```bash
$ jt ^ [ foo % ] bar % <<EOT
- {"foo": 100, "bar": 200}
- {"foo": 200, "bar": 300}
- {"foo": 300, "bar": 400}
- EOT
0       100     200
1       200     300
2       300     400
```

### Nested JSON

The `+` command parses JSON embedded in strings:

```bash
$ jt [ foo + bar % ] baz % <<EOT
- {"foo":"{\"bar\":100}","baz":200}
- {"foo":"{\"bar\":200}","baz":300}
- {"foo":"{\"bar\":300}","baz":400}
- EOT
100     200
200     300
300     400
```

**Note:** The `+` command does not modify the original JSON:

```bash
$ jt [ foo + bar % ] % <<EOT
- {"foo":"{\"bar\":100}","baz":200}
- {"foo":"{\"bar\":200}","baz":300}
- {"foo":"{\"bar\":300}","baz":400}
- EOT
100     {"foo":"{\"bar\":100}","baz":200}
200     {"foo":"{\"bar\":200}","baz":300}
300     {"foo":"{\"bar\":300}","baz":400}
```

### Column Headings

The `%=`<NAME> and `^=`<NAME> commands are like `%` and `^` above, but they
also assign column headings, which are printed as the first line of output:

```bash
$ jt [ foo %=Foo ] bar ^=Bar baz %=Baz <<EOT
- {
-   "foo": 100,
-   "bar": [
-     {"baz": 200},
-     {"baz": 300},
-     {"baz": 400}
-   ]
- }
- EOT
Foo     Bar     Baz
100     0       200
100     1       300
100     2       400
```

**Note:** The heading <NAME> must be a JSON escaped string (eg. to have a
column heading with embedded tab characters use `%=foo\tbar` instead of
`"%=foo     bar"`).

### Joins

Notice the empty column &mdash; some objects don't have the <bar> key:

```bash
$ jt [ foo % ] bar % <<EOT
- {"foo":100,"bar":1000}
- {"foo":200}
- {"foo":300,"bar":3000}
- EOT
100     1000
200
300     3000
```

Enable inner join mode with the `-j` flag. This removes output rows when a key
in the traversal path doesn't exist:

```bash
$ jt -j [ foo % ] bar % <<EOT
- {"foo":100,"bar":1000}
- {"foo":200}
- {"foo":300,"bar":3000}
- EOT
100     1000
300     3000
```

Note that this does not remove rows when the key exists and the value is empty:

```bash
$ jt -j [ foo % ] bar % <<EOT
- {"foo":100,"bar":1000}
- {"foo":200,"bar":""}
- {"foo":300,"bar":3000}
- EOT
100     1000
200
300     3000
```

### Explicit Iteration

Sometimes the implicit iteration over arrays is awkward:

```bash
$ jt . ^ . ^ % <<EOT
- {
-   "foo": [
-     {"bar":100},
-     {"bar":200}
-   ]
- }
- EOT
0       bar     100
1       bar     200
```

Should the first `^` be printing the array index of the implicit iteration
(which it does, in this case) or the object key (i.e. <foo>) of the explicit
iteration of the `.` command?

Another awkward case is printing arrays:

```bash
$ jt foo % <<EOT
- {
-   "foo": [
-     {"bar":100},
-     {"bar":200}
-   ]
- }
- EOT
{"bar":100}
{"bar":200}
```

The array can not be printed with the `%` command because it is being iterated
over implicitly. Instead, the items in the array are printed, which may not be
the desired behavior.

The `-a` flag eliminates the ambiguity by enabling explicit iteration. In this
mode the `.` command must be used to iterate over both objects and arrays &mdash;
arrays are not automatically iterated over.

Now the array can be printed:

```bash
$ jt -a foo % <<EOT
- {
-   "foo": [
-     {"bar":100},
-     {"bar":200}
-   ]
- }
- EOT
[{"bar":100},{"bar":200}]
```

Or the first `^` can print the array index, as before:

```bash
$ jt -a . . ^ . ^ % <<EOT
- {
-   "foo": [
-     {"bar":100},
-     {"bar":200}
-   ]
- }
- EOT
0       bar     100
1       bar     200
```

Or it can print the object key:

```bash
$ jt -a . ^ . . ^ % <<EOT
- {
-   "foo": [
-     {"bar":100},
-     {"bar":200}
-   ]
- }
- EOT
foo     bar     100
foo     bar     200
```

Or, with the addition of one more `^` command, it can print both:

```bash
$ jt -a . ^ . ^ . ^ % <<EOT
- {
-   "foo": [
-     {"bar":100},
-     {"bar":200}
-   ]
- }
- EOT
foo     0       bar     100
foo     1       bar     200
```

## COPYRIGHT

Copyright © 2017 Micha Niskin `<micha.niskin@gmail.com>`, distributed under
the Eclipse Public License, version 1.0. This is free software: you are free
to change and redistribute it. There is NO WARRANTY, to the extent permitted
by law.
